 <!
Hotjar Tracking Code for nmwa.org This site is optimized with the Yoast SEO plugin v18.0 - https://yoast.com/wordpress/plugins/seo/ / Yoast SEO plugin.
Google Tag Manager (noscript) End Google Tag Manager (noscript) The New NMWA Reopens this October!
Be a part of everything NEW with limited-time discounts, special recognition, and two free months of benefits as a NMWAnext member.
Join today Close Skip to content Menu Primary Navigation Visit Back Plan Your Visit Tours Accessibility Shop & Eat What's On Back Calendar Exhibitions Collection on the Move NMWA @ Home Signature Programs In Your Region Art + Artists Back Collection Artists Learn Back For Educators Publications Library & Research Center Support + Advocate Back Ways to Give Membership Committees Advocacy NMWA Campaign Connect with NMWA NMWA Campaign Join/Renew Donate Shop Supplementary Museum Info Host an Event Work With Us About Blog Press Contact Connect with NMWA NMWA Campaign Join/Renew , opens in new tab Donate , opens in new tab Shop , opens in new tab The museum is closed for renovation.
Primary Navigation Visit Plan Your Visit Tours Accessibility Shop & Eat What's On Calendar Exhibitions Collection on the Move NMWA @ Home Signature Programs In Your Region Art + Artists Collection Artists Learn For Educators Publications Library & Research Center Support + Advocate Ways to Give Membership Committees Advocacy NMWA Campaign Supplementary Museum Info Host an Event Work With Us About Blog Press Contact #nav Get Our Newsletter Frida Kahlo Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky , 1937; Oil on Masonite, 30 x 24 in.
; National Museum of Women in the Arts, Gift of the Honorable Clare Boothe Luce; © 2012 Banco de México Diego Rivera Frida Kahlo Museums Trust, Mexico, D.F.
/ Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Image by Google Share Facebook , opens in a new window.
Twitter , opens in a new window.
Email , opens your default email program.
Copy link Frida Kahlo 1907– 1954 Kahlo was the third of four daughters born to a German Hungarian-Jewish father and a mother of Spanish and Mexican Indian descent.
She did not originally plan to become an artist; rather, Kahlo, who was a polio survivor, entered a prestigious pre-medical program when she was 15.
Three years later, Kahlo was gravely hurt in a bus accident.
She spent more than a year in bed, recovering from multiple fractures of her back, collarbone, and ribs, as well as a shattered pelvis and shoulder and foot injuries.
Kahlo spent the rest of her life in constant pain, finally succumbing to related complications at the age of 47.
During her recovery, Kahlo started painting in oils, creating deliberately naive self-portraits and still lifes filled with the bright colors and flattened forms of the Mexican folk art she had always loved.
In 1929, Kahlo married the much older Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, whose approach to art and political activism complemented her own.
Theirs was a volatile relationship that underwent marital infidelities, the pressures of Rivera’s career, a divorce and remarriage, and Kahlo’s deteriorating health.
Kahlo and Rivera traveled to the United States and France, where she encountered many influential figures from the worlds of art and politics.
In 1938, she had her first solo exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York.
She enjoyed international success beginning in the 1940s.
Her reputation soared posthumously, beginning in the 1980s with the publication of numerous books about her work by feminist art historians and others.
Artist Details Name Frida Kahlo Birth Coyoacán, Mexico, 1907 Death Coyoacán, Mexico, 1954 Phonetic Spelling FREE-dah KAH-loh NMWA Exhibitions Mamacita Linda: Letters between Frida Kahlo and her Mother Places of Their Own: Emily Carr, Georgia O’Keeffe, Frida Kahlo , 2002 Preserving the Past, Securing the Future: Donations of Art, 1987–1997 , 1997 Latin American Women Artists, 1915–1995 , 1996 Lola Alvarez Bravo: Portraits of Frida Kahlo , 1991 Four Centuries of Women’s Art: The National Museum of Women in the Arts , 1990 Works by Frida Kahlo Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky Like many paintings by Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky focuses on a particular event in the artist’s life.
It commemorates the brief affair Kahlo had with the exiled Russian revolutionary leader Leon Trotsky shortly after his arrival in Mexico in 1937.
In this painting, she presents herself elegantly clothed in a long embroidered skirt, fringed shawl, and delicate gold jewelry. ...
View Artwork Details Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky , 1937; Oil on Masonite, 30 x 24 in.
; National Museum of Women in the Arts, Gift of the Honorable Clare Boothe Luce; © 2012 Banco de México Diego Rivera Frida Kahlo Museums Trust, Mexico, D.F.
/ Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Image by Google Related Posts Apr 27, 2022 NMWA at the National Gallery: Modern Visions Posted: Apr 27, 2022 in From the Collection Just a mile from their home at NMWA, 11 collection works are on display at the National Gallery.
Learn about works by Frida Kahlo, Eva Hesse, and Amy Sherald as presented in a fresh context.
Blog Category: From the Collection May 18, 2020 Iturbide and Kahlo: A Conversation Posted: May 18, 2020 in NMWA Exhibitions In one intimate photograph, Graciela Iturbide responds—and pays homage—to Frida Kahlo’s cultural legacy, creating an artistic dialogue between the two women.
Blog Category: NMWA Exhibitions May 13, 2020 Director’s Desk: Illuminating Frida Kahlo Posted: May 13, 2020 in Director's Desk Frida Kahlo created intense and revealing self-portraits that chronicle, among many other subjects, her involvement with the worldwide Communist Revolution.
Blog Category: Director's Desk View All Posts about Frida Kahlo Related Exhibitions Mamacita Linda: Letters Between Frida Kahlo and Her Mother May 01 to Jul 31, 2012 Showcasing a selection of letters sent between Frida Kahlo and her mother in the years just before her mother’s death.
View Exhibition Frida Kahlo: Public Image, Private Life.
A Selection of Photographs and Letters Jul 06 to Oct 14, 2007 Frida Kahlo: Public Image, Private Life features the museum’s prized possession, Kahlo’s Self-portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky , photographs of the artist, and materials culled from an important collection of over 300 of her personal letters.
Places of Their Own: Emily Carr, Georgia O'Keeffe, and Frida Kahlo Feb 08 to May 12, 2002 These three women, Emily Carr (1871-1945, Canada), Frida Kahlo (1907-1954, Mexico) and Georgia O'Keeffe (1887-1986, United States), have each achieved legendary, even iconic, stature in their native countries.
Collectively, their work gives form to a mythos of North America, linking region and nationality to larger forces at work in Western consciousness.
Latin American Women Artists, 1915-1995 Feb 08 to Apr 29, 1996 This exhibition presents three periods of modern art from the Southern Hemisphere, demonstrating in each that women have made substantial contributions to the artistic mainstream of their day.
Works of Distinction: Selected Donations and Loans Feb 03 to Apr 28, 1991 This exhibition acknowledged many of the individuals and institutions who donated or loaned work to the permanent collection since NMWA opened in 1987.
Four Centuries of Women's Art: The National Museum of Women in the Arts Aug 15, 1990, to Jun 09, 1991 One hundred artworks from NMWA's permanent collection toured 8 cities in Japan for a year.
Artist Pagination Previous Artist Frida Baranek Back to All Artists Next Artist Friederun Friederichs /content-wrapper Footer Champion women through the arts Ancillary Footer Navigation Host an Event Work With Us About Blog Press Contact Ancillary Footer Navigation Host an Event Work With Us About Blog Press Contact Find Us Physical Address National Museum of Women in the Arts 1250 New York Ave. NW Washington, DC 20005 Mailing Address 1615 M Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20036 202-783-5000 1-800-222-7270 Social Media Facebook , opens in new tab Twitter , opens in new tab Instagram , opens in new tab Youtube , opens in new tab Renovation The museum building is currently closed for a major renovation with plans to reopen in fall 2023.
Learn More about Our Renovation Sign Up For Our Newsletter First Name: Last Name: Email: Zip Code: Spam Control Text: Please leave this field empty © Copyright 2023 National Museum of Women in the Arts Legal And Technical Resources Privacy Policy Conditions of Use
