 Skip to main content An official website of the United States government.
National Nanotechnology Initiative ABOUT NNCO Search About the NNI NNI Vision and Goals Organization and Leadership NNI Budget NNI R&D User Facilities National Nanotechnology Coordination Office About Nanotechnology Just How Small Is “Nano”?
What Is So Special about “Nano”?
Applications of Nanotechnology Working at the Nanoscale Standards for Nanotechnology Get Involved Research Community Meetings and Events Public Webinars Networks and Communities National Nanotechnology Challenges National Nanotechnology Day Industry Meeting and Events Public Webinars Networks and Communities National Nanotechnology Challenges Education and Outreach NextTech Student Network National Nanotechnology Day Public Webinars General Public Twitter LinkedIn Public Webinars National Nanotechnology Day Resources General Public About Nanotechnology Nanotechnology: Big Things from a Tiny World NNCI Events Podcasts Press Releases National Nanotechnology Day NNCO Quarterly Newsletter NISE Network Research Community Nanotechnology R&D Funding NNI R&D User Facilities NNI R&D Centers & Networks Responsible Development of Nanotechnology Resources for Nanotechnology Laboratory Safety Publications Podcasts Public Webinars Press Releases Industry FAQs for Business NNI R&D User Facilities Diversity Programs for Small Businesses Manufacturing Extension Partnership America’s Seed Fund – SBIR/STTR Contract Opportunities U.S. Patent and Trademark Office National Institute for Health and Safety (NIOSH) – Nanotechnology Press Releases Education and Outreach Educational Resources for K-12 Teachers NextTech Student Network Pursuing a Career in Nanotechnology Professional Development Opportunities for Teachers Training Opportunities National Nanotechnology Initiative NNCO Navigation About the NNI NNI Vision and Goals Organization and Leadership NNI Budget NNI R&D User Facilities National Nanotechnology Coordination Office About Nanotechnology Just How Small Is “Nano”?
What Is So Special about “Nano”?
Applications of Nanotechnology Working at the Nanoscale Standards for Nanotechnology Get Involved Research Community Meetings and Events Public Webinars Networks and Communities National Nanotechnology Challenges National Nanotechnology Day Industry Meeting and Events Public Webinars Networks and Communities National Nanotechnology Challenges Education and Outreach NextTech Student Network National Nanotechnology Day Public Webinars General Public Twitter LinkedIn Public Webinars National Nanotechnology Day Resources General Public About Nanotechnology Nanotechnology: Big Things from a Tiny World NNCI Events Podcasts Press Releases National Nanotechnology Day NNCO Quarterly Newsletter NISE Network Research Community Nanotechnology R&D Funding NNI R&D User Facilities NNI R&D Centers & Networks Responsible Development of Nanotechnology Resources for Nanotechnology Laboratory Safety Publications Podcasts Public Webinars Press Releases Industry FAQs for Business NNI R&D User Facilities Diversity Programs for Small Businesses Manufacturing Extension Partnership America’s Seed Fund – SBIR/STTR Contract Opportunities U.S. Patent and Trademark Office National Institute for Health and Safety (NIOSH) – Nanotechnology Press Releases Education and Outreach Educational Resources for K-12 Teachers NextTech Student Network Pursuing a Career in Nanotechnology Professional Development Opportunities for Teachers Training Opportunities What Is Nanotechnology?
Nanotechnology is science, engineering, and technology conducted at the nanoscale, which is about 1 to 100 nanometers.
Physicist Richard Feynman, the father of nanotechnology.
Nanoscience and nanotechnology are the study and application of extremely small things and can be used across all the other science fields, such as chemistry, biology, physics, materials science, and engineering.
How It Started The ideas and concepts behind nanoscience and nanotechnology started with a talk entitled “ There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom ” by physicist Richard Feynman at an American Physical Society meeting at the California Institute of Technology (CalTech) on December 29, 1959, long before the term nanotechnology was used.
In his talk, Feynman described a process in which scientists would be able to manipulate and control individual atoms and molecules.
Over a decade later, in his explorations of ultraprecision machining, Professor Norio Taniguchi coined the term nanotechnology.
It wasn't until 1981, with the development of the scanning tunneling microscope that could "see" individual atoms, that modern nanotechnology began.
Fundamental Concepts in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Medieval stained glass windows are an example of how nanotechnology was used in the pre-modern era.
(Courtesy: NanoBioNet) It’s hard to imagine just how small nanotechnology is .
One nanometer is a billionth of a meter, or 10 -9 of a meter.
Here are a few illustrative examples: There are 25,400,000 nanometers in an inch A sheet of newspaper is about 100,000 nanometers thick On a comparative scale, if a marble were a nanometer, then one meter would be the size of the Earth Nanoscience and nanotechnology involve the ability to see and to control individual atoms and molecules.
Everything on Earth is made up of atoms—the food we eat, the clothes we wear, the buildings and houses we live in, and our own bodies.
But something as small as an atom is impossible to see with the naked eye.
In fact, it’s impossible to see with the microscopes typically used in a high school science classes.
The microscopes needed to see things at the nanoscale were invented in the early 1980s.
Once scientists had the right tools, such as the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and the atomic force microscope (AFM), the age of nanotechnology was born.
Although modern nanoscience and nanotechnology are quite new, nanoscale materials were used for centuries.
Alternate-sized gold and silver particles created colors in the stained glass windows of medieval churches hundreds of years ago.
The artists back then just didn’t know that the process they used to create these beautiful works of art actually led to changes in the composition of the materials they were working with.
Today's scientists and engineers are finding a wide variety of ways to deliberately make materials at the nanoscale to take advantage of their enhanced properties such as higher strength, lighter weight, increased control of light spectrum, and greater chemical reactivity than their larger-scale counterparts.
Nano.gov Home | Contact Us National Nanotechnology Coordination Office 2415 Eisenhower Avenue Alexandria, VA 22314 202-517-1050 www.nano.gov About Nanotechnology About the NNI Networks and Communities Industry R&D Infrastructure Educational Resources Press Releases Meetings and Events Copyright Information Privacy Policy Link Policy About NNI Logo and NNCO Seal Official website of the United States National Nanotechnology Initiative
