Skip to main content Sign Up Search News Culture Entertainment Style Community Answers & Advice Shop Open Navigation Menu To revisit this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories Close Alert SOPA Images/Getty Images News Everything That Happened in Anti-Trans Legislation This Week: March 4-11 We have to discuss what's happening in Florida.
By Trans Formations Project March 10, 2023 The following weekly digest is written and compiled by the Trans Formations Project , a grassroots nonprofit dedicated to tracking and educating about the anti-trans legislative crisis currently sweeping the United States.
You can follow their work and latest updates via Twitter , Instagram , TikTok , Tumblr , Facebook , and Discord .
We must discuss what is now an official, reported fact: The current wave of anti-trans moral panic has been engineered by right-wing hate groups.
These groups include the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF), the American College of Pediatricians (ACPeds), the Heritage Foundation, the Liberty Council, and even some former NARTH (i.e., gay conversion therapists) members.
A report by Mother Jones details the contents of the leak and its role in current politics.
A trans hacktivist posted the entirety of the emails on her website.
Zinnia Jones of Gender Analysis has annotated those emails in depth.
She noted the presence of key personnel in groups like the allegedly secular Society for Evidence-Based Gender Medicine (SEGM) colluding with the aforementioned hate groups.
These annotations also reveal the involvement of several key figures in Florida’s efforts to manufacture a case before the board of medicine, and the religious zealotry that animates these groups.
With that out of the way… What’s Happening in Florida?
: We are once again doing a deep dive on Florida, as the Florida session has officially started.
At this point, all pre-filed Florida bills have been introduced.
The most genuinely terrifying of these bills is S0254 .
This bill would not only codify affirming trans children as child abuse, but remove trans kids from supportive parents and place them under the custody of the state.
Further, any custody agreements in which trans children are removed from a non-supportive parent and placed with a supportive parent will be voided under Florida law, even if that custody agreement didn’t take place in Florida.
This means that, hypothetically, a transphobic parent from California could kidnap their trans kid, drag them to Florida, detransition their kid, and subject them to conversion therapy, and it would be 100% legal under this law.
That’s how bad this one is, and it gets worse.
The bill also applies to any child considered at risk of transitioning, which the law claims just having a trans sibling or a trans parent constitutes.
In other words, if you’re trans, this law would not only allow, but require , the Florida child welfare system to straight-up steal your kids.
Even if those kids are cisgender.
Even if those kids are straight.
Simply because they’re your kids, that’s reason enough in the eyes of this law.
This bill represents a form of state-sponsored kidnapping that is unfortunately common in American history, be it disproportionate removals of Black children from homes on flimsy pretexts, or the long history of abducting Native children for “adoption” by White evangelical families (for more information, listen to Season 2 of “ This Land ”), and represents a well-established tool of genocidal practices.
This is not hyperbole: it’s simply a statement of historical fact.
It is also worth noting that Texas attorney general Ken Paxton, known for his extrajudicial attempts to remove trans youth from their affirming families, is also the lynchpin of right-wing attempts to undo the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), passed to redress these historical wrongs.
Other Florida bills introduced this week include: S1674 , a bathroom bill which includes criminal penalties H1521 , a combination bathroom and domestic violence shelter ban, which also had its first reading Schooling bills H1223 , S1320 , and H1069 , which you can read more about at NBC news Censoring bills S1620 and H1463 , which also had their first reading H1421 , a combination birth certificate and insurance/healthcare ban bill, which also had its first reading Outside of Florida, the following new bills were introduced this week: At the federal level, HR734 was introduced this week and is advancing in the House.
This is a nation-wide sports ban bill that would stop trans and intersex student athletes from participating in sports.
You can call your congressional representative to speak out against this harmful bill.
Tell them to “Let Kids Play!” at (202) 224-3121.
It has passed out of the House Education and Workforce Committee.
However, there’s no chance of it passing in the current senate.
Still, it signals clear intent and shouldn’t be disregarded.
The infamous Marjorie Taylor Greene has also vowed , at CPAC, to reintroduce her federal level bill aiming to outlaw gender-affirmative care nationwide.
The bill in question was first introduced last year and failed miserably, as will this one in the current legislative session, given the Democratic Senate.
If and when Greene does reintroduce this bill, it should still be taken seriously, as with HR734.
Alaska HB105 , a parental rights bill, was introduced on Wednesday and sent to the Education Committee.
As noted above, a hearing for this bill is scheduled for Monday 3/13.
Alaska SB96 , both a parental rights bill and a bathroom bill, was introduced Wednesday and sent to the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Michigan HB4195 , a school-based bathroom bill, was introduced and sent to the Committee On Government Operations on Wednesday.
Michigan HB4257 is a particularly insidious healthcare ban that would criminalize providing gender-affirming care and classify allowing a minor to receive gender affirming care as first-degree child abuse.
The punishment?
Life in prison.
North Dakota HB1522 was introduced, had its first reading, and was referred to the Senate Human Services Committee last Friday.
This bill would be an emergency measure and allow a board of a school district or a school to prohibit a transgender student from using a restroom consistent with their gender identity.
Rhode Island S0487 , which restricts use of bathrooms and sleeping quarters during overnight school trips, was introduced on Tuesday and sent to the Senate Education Committee.
Texas SB14 , a healthcare and public funds ban, was filed on Wednesday.
Texas HB4129 , which would classify drag/”crossdressing” as erotic and ban it around children, was filed on Wednesday.
Bills that passed this week: Arkansas SB294 was signed into law by the Governor this week.
This bill, known as the "LEARNS Act," changes significant aspects of primary and secondary school education.
For example, the bill contains a section entitled "Indoctrination," which states that the Department of Education should review policies, materials, and communications that would promote the teaching and learning of "ideologies, such as Critical Race Theory."
The bill also argues against discussing how anyone from a protected category (race, sex, class, etc) is superior or inferior to someone from another protected class.
It is worth repeating that Critical Race Theory is only meant to be a postsecondary subject.
And yet, this bill uses it as a tool to threaten discussions of power dynamics, which are key to understanding social structures of cultures throughout time and history.
For example, how do you discuss the Holocaust without acknowledging the fear and hate of the Jewish people, and the resulting supremacy complex?
In addition, this bill gives parents the right to review materials before classroom instruction and prohibits public school teachers from teaching about gender identity or sexual orientation to students before grade 5.
Also in Arkansas, SB199 was sent to the Governor for signature.
This is an under-18 gender-affirming healthcare ban.
Specifically, this bill bans all medical care done for transition purposes for minors unless they have proof.
Two independent healthcare providers must have documented that a minor's perception of their own gender does not align with their gender assigned at birth for two years.
This ban includes puberty blockers, surgeries, and hormone replacement therapy and excludes treatment for people with intersex traits Iowa SF538 also passed in both chambers and is headed to the Governor for signature.
This bill bans all medical care done for transition purposes for minors (under the age of 18).
This ban includes puberty blockers, surgeries, and hormone replacement therapy.
The bill also specifically allows for "corrective" procedures for intersex traits.
This bill was essentially fast-tracked into law by substituting this bill (SF538) for a cross-filed version in the House (HF623).
This allowed legislators to take advantage of the progression of the House bill and then send the Senate bill off to the Governor immediately for signature.
Kansas HB2238 passed in the Senate and will now head to the Governor for signature.
This is a sports ban bill which specifically targets trans girls.
Once again, dozens of other anti-trans bills (organized by type, listed alphabetically by state) progressed this week: Bathroom Bills.
A bathroom bill denies access to public restrooms by gender or trans identity.
They increase danger without making anyone any safer and have even prompted attacks on cis and trans people alike.
Many national health and anti-sexual assault organizations oppose these bills.
Most Popular News Florida Lawmakers Proposed Allowing Trans Kids to Be Removed From Supportive Parents James Factora Celebrity “Why is No One in the DMs”: Dylan Mulvaney Discussed Dating as a Trans Woman James Factora News Four Florida College Students Were Arrested at a Protest Against Ron DeSantis Samantha Riedel News Inside the Secret Working Group That Helped Push Anti-Trans Laws Across the Country Madison Pauly, Mother Jones Arkansas SB270 , which already passed in the Senate, passed its House Judiciary Committee hearing.
Idaho S1016 had its third reading.
Idaho S1100 had its third Senate reading.
Iowa HF622 is on the House floor.
This was renumbered from HSB208.
Iowa SF482 passed in the Senate and moved to the House.
Healthcare bans.
Healthcare bills go against professional and scientific consensus that gender affirming care saves lives.
Denying access will cause harm.
Providers are faced with criminal charges, parents are threatened with child abuse charges, and intersex children are typically exempted.
For a visual representation of healthcare bans across the U.S., The Movement Advancement Project has an interactive map you can access.
Georgia SB140 passed the Senate and then moved to the House where it was sent to the House Public Health Committee.
Georgia HB653 was introduced and sent to the House Public Health Committee.
Indiana SB0480 moved to the House Public Health Committee.
Missouri HB419 passed the House and moved to the Senate.
Texas HB3502 was filed last Friday.
Texas HB1532 was referred to the House Public Health Committee last Friday.
Texas HB1752 moved to the House Judiciary & Civil Jurisprudence Committee.
Texas HB1686 moved to the House Public Health Committee.
West Virginia HB2007 passed in committee and is now on its 2nd reading.
Most Popular News Florida Lawmakers Proposed Allowing Trans Kids to Be Removed From Supportive Parents James Factora Celebrity “Why is No One in the DMs”: Dylan Mulvaney Discussed Dating as a Trans Woman James Factora News Four Florida College Students Were Arrested at a Protest Against Ron DeSantis Samantha Riedel News Inside the Secret Working Group That Helped Push Anti-Trans Laws Across the Country Madison Pauly, Mother Jones Drag bans.
Public performance bans, or "drag bans," restrict access for folks who are gender non-conforming in any way.
They loosely define "drag" as any public performance with an “opposite gender expression,” as sexual in nature, and inappropriate for children.
This also pushes trans individuals out of public spaces.
Arizona SB1698 had its second reading in the House.
Tennessee HB0030 passed in the House, crossed over to the Senate, and had its first reading.
Texas HB1266 was referred to the House State Affairs Committee last Friday.
Schooling bills.
Schooling / Parental Rights bills force schools to misgender or deadname students, ban instruction on sexual orientation and gender identity, and make schools alert parents if they suspect a child is trans.
They remove life-saving affirmation and support for trans youth.
Arizona SB1001 had its second reading in the House.
Indiana HB1608 was sent to the Senate Education and Career Development Committee.
Indiana HB1407 , which already passed in the House, crossed over to the Senate and was referred to the Senate Rules and Legislative Procedure Committee.
Sex designation bills.
Sex designation bills make it harder for trans folks to have IDs, such as birth certificates, that match their gender identity.
They can force a male or female designation based upon sex assigned at birth.
Some ban a non-binary “X” marker or require surgery to qualify for ID updates.
Montana SB458 has a hearing in the Senate Finance and Claims Committee today.
Texas HB3883 and HB3902 , sex designation bills, were filed.
Texas HB1952 moved to the House Judiciary and Civil Jurisprudence Committee.
Most Popular News Florida Lawmakers Proposed Allowing Trans Kids to Be Removed From Supportive Parents James Factora Celebrity “Why is No One in the DMs”: Dylan Mulvaney Discussed Dating as a Trans Woman James Factora News Four Florida College Students Were Arrested at a Protest Against Ron DeSantis Samantha Riedel News Inside the Secret Working Group That Helped Push Anti-Trans Laws Across the Country Madison Pauly, Mother Jones Sports bans.
Most sports bills force schools to designate teams by sex assigned at birth.
They are often one-sided and ban trans girls from playing on teams consistent with their gender identity.
Some egregious bills even force invasive genital examinations on student athletes.
North Dakota HB1249 was re-referred to the Senate Judiciary Committee last Friday.
Other anti-trans bills.
These are other negative bills that attack trans rights outside of the bill types above.
Oklahoma SB408 passed the Senate, crossed over to the House, and had its first reading.
This is a sex definition bill that also restricts access to gender-affirming spaces, including prisons, domestic violence shelters, rape crisis centers, locker rooms, and restrooms.
Additionally, it forces any vital statistics to define people as male or female based on their “biological reproductive system.” The Things We Won!
Starting things off, loads of anti-trans bills failed this week.
The biggest victory is in Oklahoma where roughly 40 bills failed to advance to committee and are dead.
Utah SB0283 (an anti-DEI bill for higher education) and HB0132 (an under-18 gender-affirming healthcare ban) also both failed last Friday.
In terms of positive legislation, New Mexico HB7 passed in the Senate.
This positive bill is a Reproductive & Gender-Affirming Health Care Freedom Act that would prohibit healthcare discrimination!
This bill has now passed in both chambers and will head to the Governor for signature.
Another piece of awesome news: Minnesota Governor Tim Walz signed an executive order to protect access to gender-affirming healthcare in the state by making Minnesota a trans refugee state.
This executive order is similar to legislation (HF146) introduced by Democratic Representative Leigh Finke.
Like other trans refugee states, this means that Minnesota cannot enforce court orders from other states, such as child protection laws, that interfere with accessing gender-affirming healthcare in Minnesota.
We also have good news to share from Michigan , where the state legislature passed a bill to protect rights, explicitly including sexual orientation and gender identity under the state's civil rights act.
It heads to Governor Gretchen Whitmer for signature, and she has stated her intention to sign the civil rights protections into law.
You can thank the state legislators and Governor Whitmer at this website .
Democratic State Senators in Missouri have also, at long last, turned out for trans youth– initiating filibusters in the Missouri Senate aimed at blocking Republican efforts to ban gender-affirming care by doing so.
We need more of this!
Democrats in Red States, if you’re reading, you can do this too!
We should also recognize that the filibuster is led by Greg Razer–Missouri’s only openly gay senator.
That said, Razer cautioned that when the legislature meets again on March 20th, they will likely pass a version of the bill in question.
Yet, the efforts of Razer matter–and we’re counting it.
We also saw trans folks and allies showing up and organizing across the US, including the Transgender Advocacy Day at the Texas Capital.
What the Heck Else Happened This Week?
First, we want to comment on particularly dangerous and harmful statements made last weekend.
We at the Trans Formations Project are angry about the comments made about the trans community at CPAC , particularly the statement that "transgenderism must be eradicated from public life entirely."
Statements such as this are not merely political rhetoric.
They are genocidal and inflammatory.
Elimination of a marginalized community is their objective.
These remarks lead to real world violence.
We condemn this statement, and are profoundly disappointed that CPAC allowed such a statement to occur at their proceedings.
Most Popular News Florida Lawmakers Proposed Allowing Trans Kids to Be Removed From Supportive Parents James Factora Celebrity “Why is No One in the DMs”: Dylan Mulvaney Discussed Dating as a Trans Woman James Factora News Four Florida College Students Were Arrested at a Protest Against Ron DeSantis Samantha Riedel News Inside the Secret Working Group That Helped Push Anti-Trans Laws Across the Country Madison Pauly, Mother Jones Further, Alaska has made it official: the state’s policy is that it is only illegal in “some” instances to bully and discriminate against LGBTQ+ people.
ProPublica reports that these changes were made at the behest of a conservative Christian group and under the advice of Attorney General Treg Taylor.
The move is not only transparently homophobic and transphobic, but also a cowardly act of political expediency.
The Oklahoma State Legislature voted to censure its sole openly non-binary legislator, Maureen Turner.
They sheltered trans protestors who were having a panic attack in their office.
While the protestors were being pursued by police in association with splashing water on a representative and “resisting arrest” by panicking, three important details must be noted.
First, Rep. Turner did not “shelter fugitives.” Someone has to be charged with a crime before they’re “fugitives,” and no charges had yet been laid.
Second, the censure was conducted quickly and without investigation.
Third, the Oklahoma State Legislature has failed to censure Republican members known as drunk drivers and indicted for multiple felony charges .
This double standard may be explained by Rep. Turner's difference in political affiliation, gender identity, race, and religion.
Lastly, the infamous group Our Duty , an association of transphobic parent activists aiming to eliminate trans children entirely by achieving “100% desistance,” has shown their hand mobilizing in support of Pennsylvania HB138, which would allow for suits against the state’s gender clinics.
\ Jumping in now to legislative updates, we are currently at over 400 anti-trans bills moving across the U.S.
This is over twice the amount introduced last year.
We have action items across the U.S. for next week.
We also post a weekly thread of action items that we update daily on our Twitter .
Equality Texas is hosting regional advocacy days in Dallas and Houston tomorrow, Saturday, March 11th.
You can learn more on their Twitter .
Alaska HB105 , a schooling/parental rights bill, has a hearing on Monday, March 13th at 8 am in Davis 106.
Florida S0254 has a hearing on Monday, March 13th at 3:30 pm in 412 Knott Building.
New Hampshire HB619 has a hearing on Wednesday, March 15th at 9:30 am in Legislative Office Building 301-303.
This is a broad bill which includes (a) an under-18 gender-affirming healthcare ban, (b) schooling/parental rights language, (c) a sports ban, and (d) language permitting conversion therapy.
Tennessee SB0466 , a forced misgendering bill, has a hearing on Wednesday, March 15th at 12:00 pm in Cordell Hull Building along with Tennessee SB1237 , a sports ban bill.
You can use this resource from the Tennessee Equality Project for other action items this upcoming week in the state.
Most Popular News Florida Lawmakers Proposed Allowing Trans Kids to Be Removed From Supportive Parents James Factora Celebrity “Why is No One in the DMs”: Dylan Mulvaney Discussed Dating as a Trans Woman James Factora News Four Florida College Students Were Arrested at a Protest Against Ron DeSantis Samantha Riedel News Inside the Secret Working Group That Helped Push Anti-Trans Laws Across the Country Madison Pauly, Mother Jones If you want to keep up with legislative updates throughout the week, be sure to connect with us on social media.
We also recently launched a daily stream where Trans Formations Project content creator Tabbytha does a daily breakdown of legislative updates.
Be sure to tune in tonight and every weekday at 6 pm Eastern time at twitch.tv/thetransformationsproject .
We know that staying up-to-date with anti-trans legislation may be distressing to our readers.
If you or someone you know needs support, here are a few affirming resources that you can reach out to: Everything That Happened in Anti-Trans Legislation This Week: Feb 25-March 3 Tennessee signed the nation's first drag ban into law and became the latest state to put a ban on gender-affirming care for trans youth.
If you need support or are in crisis you can contact the Trans Lifeline hotline at (877) 565-8860.
The Trans Lifeline is run by trans people, for trans people, and does not engage in non-consensual active rescue, meaning they will not call law enforcement without your consent.
You can connect with a Trevor Project crisis counselor via phone 1 (866) 488-7386, chat , or text (Text ‘START’ to 678-678) support.
Note: This resource could utilize non-consensual active rescue, including law enforcement, 911, and first responders.
You can call the LGBT National Hotline at (888) 843-4564, or connect with a peer via chat .
The LGBT National Help Center will NOT call other suicide hotlines, law enforcement, 911, or rescue services.
BlackLine is a BIPOC LGBTQ+ support line, run by BIPOC folks, for BIPOC folks.
This resource does not involve law enforcement or state agencies.
You can call 1 (800) 604-5841 to chat with a peer.
Get the best of what’s queer.
Sign up for Them ’s weekly newsletter here.
Tags Legislation transgender rights news protest LGBTQ+ rights politics transgender Read More News Everything That Happened in Anti-Trans Legislation This Week: Feb 25-March 3 By Trans Formations Project News 6 Orgs Fighting Back Against Anti-Trans Legislation in Tennessee and Beyond By Samantha Riedel News Everything That Happened in Anti-Trans Legislation This Week By Trans Formations Project News Activists Convinced a Utah Legislator to Rewrite His Discriminatory “Don’t Say Gay” Bill By Samantha Riedel Them is the award-winning authority on what LGBTQ+ means today — and tomorrow.
From in-depth storytelling on the fight for LGBTQ+ rights to intimate profiles of queer cultural vanguards, it’s a platform for all of the bold, stylish, and rebellious ways that LGBTQ+ people are reshaping our world every day.
Our Story About Them Contact Careers Media kit RSS Feeds Condé Nast Store Condé Nast Spotlight Do Not Sell My Personal Info © 2023 Condé Nast.
All rights reserved.
Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement and Your California Privacy Rights.
Them may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers.
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
Ad Choices CN Living
