Start the day smarter ☀️ Historic achievements Take our news quiz 📝 Where they are moving For You U.S. Sports Entertainment Life Money Tech Travel Opinion ONLY AT USA TODAY: Newsletters For Subscribers From the Archives Crossword eNewspaper Magazines Investigations Weather Forecast Podcasts Video Humankind Just Curious Pets Food Reviewed Coupons Blueprint Best Auto Insurance Best Pet Insurance Best Travel Insurance Best Credit Cards Best CD Rates Best Personal Loans Subscribe NATION Transgender Bathroom Debate Add Topic Arkansas Senate passes transgender restroom bill critics call extreme Thao Nguyen USA TODAY The majority-Republican Arkansas state Senate voted Tuesday to pass a bill that would criminalize transgender people from using public changing facilities that coincides with their gender identity, introducing a restriction critics say would be the most extreme in the country.
Under Senate Bill 270 , a transgender person would be charged with misdemeanor sexual indecency with a child if they use a public changing facility that doesn't match their assigned sex at birth.
According to the bill, sex is defined as a person's biological "anatomy and genetics existing at the time of birth."
The bill also defines public changing facilities as restrooms, bathrooms, locker rooms, or shower rooms but doesn't include a private dressing area in commercial clothing stores.
While several Republican lawmakers abstained from the vote, the bill was approved on a 19-7 vote in the 35-member Senate.
The bill will now head to the GOP-run state House.
The bill comes amidst an upsurge of anti-transgender legislation and increasingly hostile rhetoric against transgender people in largely red states.
More than 175 bills targeting transgender people's rights have been introduced this year, according to the Human Rights Campaign .
"What this is is an attack on the continued existence in public of transgender people, and the criminalization of being transgender in public," said Cathryn Oakley, state legislative director and senior counsel at the Human Rights Campaign.
'YOU HAVE TO STAND UP TO BULLIES': How Rachel Levine fights for LBGTQ people as highest-ranking transperson MISSISSIPPI RESTRICTS GENDER-AFFIRMING CARE: Surgeries, hormone treatments now banned for transgender minors in Mississippi Latest bathroom bill bans in US According to the Human Rights Campaign, more bathroom ban bills have been filed in 2023 than in any previous year.
And the Arkansas legislation is more restrictive compared to other bathroom ban bills passed in other states.
The legislation goes even further than the now-repealed North Carolina bathroom bill , which faced widespread boycotts and protests after it was enacted in 2016.
Unlike the Arkansas bill, the North Carolina law did not include criminal penalties.
Despite the retaliation seen over the former North Carolina law, GOP lawmakers have introduced a flood of bills with similar restrictions.
Arkansas Legislature has another bill pending that would prevent transgender people at public schools from using bathrooms that match their gender identity.
Similar laws have been enacted in Alabama, Oklahoma, and Tennessee.
Lawsuits have been filed challenging the Oklahoma and Tennessee laws.
'I DON'T WANT TO BE NEXT': Milwaukee sees 3 Black transgender women killed in 9 months Arkansas Legislation worries transgender community Although the Arkansas bill has some exemptions, including allowing parents and guardians to accompany children under the age of 7 to public restrooms, the legislation worries the transgender community.
Little Rock transgender activist Miss Major Griffin-Gracy and her partner Beck Major, who is also transgender, said they would be left with a difficult decision to make.
With a two-year-old son, the couple said they would have to eventually decide whether to send him into public restrooms alone or risk being charged under the law.
"Those are two horrible choices for a parent to make," Beck Major said.
"What choice would you make?"
Others have expressed concerns over facing further harassment in public restrooms if the bill becomes law.
Kathy Brown-Nichols, of Arkansas, who describes herself as a butch lesbian, said she's already regularly harassed and questioned when she uses the women's restroom in public because of her appearance.
"They are putting a big bullseye on people that are different," she said.
Contributing: The Associated Press Featured Weekly Ad About Us Newsroom Staff Ethical Principles Request a Correction Press Releases Accessibility Sitemap Subscription Terms & Conditions Terms of Service Your California Privacy Rights/Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Info/Cookie Policy Contact Us Help Center My Account Give Feedback Get Home Delivery eNewspaper USA TODAY Shop USA TODAY Print Editions Licensing & Reprints Advertise Careers Internships Support Local Business News Tips Submitting letters to the editor Podcasts Newsletters Mobile Apps Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest YouTube Reddit Flipboard RSS 10Best Reviewed Jobs Sports Weekly Studio Gannett USA TODAY Sports+ Classifieds Coupons Blueprint Auto Insurance Pet Insurance Travel Insurance Credit Cards Banking Personal Loans © 2023 USA TODAY, a division of Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC.
