 Cookies Consent Notice start - OneTrust Cookies Consent Notice end - OneTrust start Permutive end Permutive LiveRamp ATS BoB OTTOBOX HTLBID Prebid Ad Config A9 APS A9 APS Confiant ad fraud protection Google Publisher Tag End Google Publisher Tag Google Tag Manager dataLayer End Google Tag Manager dataLayer Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager Google Tag Manager End Google Tag Manager AAX OneSignal SDK End OneSignal SDK OneSignal initialization End OneSignal initialization WP SEO WP SEO BEGIN Sailthru Horizon Meta Information END Sailthru Horizon Meta Information Jetpack Open Graph Tags End Jetpack Open Graph Tags Google Tag Manager (noscript) End Google Tag Manager (noscript) Google Tag Manager (noscript) End Google Tag Manager (noscript) Skip to content KELOLAND.com Sign Up Sponsored By Toggle Menu Search Please enter a search term.
Primary Menu News Local News Capitol News Bureau KELOLAND.com Originals Agriculture Automotive News Coronavirus Eye on KELOLAND HealthBeat Investigates MMIP in South Dakota Politics from The Hill National & World News Positively KELOLAND Press Releases South Dakota Legislative Session South Dakota Marijuana Your Local Election Headquarters Your Money Matters Top Stories Bud Grant, coach of powerful Vikings teams dies 3 hours ago Latest snowfall has created slick roads 4 hours ago Video SD less satisfied with democracy, survey says 17 hours ago Catching up with longtime anchor Doug Lund 20 hours ago Video Weather KELOLAND Weather Radar Live Cam Closeline Submit A Closing Weather Alerts WeatherNow Stream KELOLAND Live Doppler HD Storm Center Storm Tracker App Rain Gauge Drought Sports Summit League High School Basketball Brackets SportsZone Scoreboard The KELO Cup SDSU Jackrabbits USD Coyotes Top Stories Wadsworth, Koupal lead Hamlin, Wagner to state finals Video Top Stories Washington, Pierre win in class ‘AA’ semifinals Video Top Stories Wall, Viborg-Hurley to play for class ‘B’ title 16 hours ago Video Central Lyon defeats Western Christian, wins 2A title 17 hours ago Video Augustana women fall in NCAA Tournament 17 hours ago Girls State Basketball results – Semifinal Friday 16 hours ago Watch Video Center Watch Newscasts KELOLAND WeatherNow Program Schedule CBS News Live Feed KELOXTRA CW of the Black Hills KELOLAND Living Arts & Crafts Show Book Club Host Chat Across The Table Business Beat Do It Yourself Recipes Be Our Guest BestReviews BestReviews Daily Deals Be On The Show Our Team KELOLAND Living Golf Tour KELOLAND Living Newsletter Top Stories South Dakota Parks & Wildlife Foundation: Hunting … Video Top Stories A weekend of fun at the 2023 Sioux Empire Sportsmen’s … 1 day ago Video Chamber Music Collective inspires inclusion this … 23 hours ago Video Save your sauces: Compound butters and thickening … 23 hours ago Video How being sleepless affects your heart health 1 day ago Video Employment Automall Community Buy Local Classifieds Contests Continuing the conversation Events Calendar Gas Prices KELOLAND Pets Obituaries Remarkable Women Tradition Of Caring Lottery Horoscopes About Contact Us uShare 70th Anniversary Our History Our People Captain 11 KELOLAND Careers Regional News Partners Sign Up For Newsletters Advertise With Us Online Services About BestReviews Do Not Sell My Personal Information Search Please enter a search term.
KELOLAND.com Original Anti-trans legislation in South Dakota and beyond by: Jacob Newton Posted: Mar 8, 2023 / 03:29 PM CST Updated: Mar 9, 2023 / 07:41 AM CST .article-header by: Jacob Newton Posted: Mar 8, 2023 / 03:29 PM CST Updated: Mar 9, 2023 / 07:41 AM CST SHARE SIOUX FALLS, S.D.
(KELO) — In South Dakota’s 2023 legislative session, three bills were introduced that would target transgender individuals in the state.
These are House Bills 1125 , 1116 and 1080 .
1125 is a bill that would ban minors from being exposed to drag performance, which the bill defined as “singing, speaking, dancing, acting, simulation, or pantomiming, where a performer, in a lewd and lascivious manner, and in the presence of others, exhibits a gender identity that is different from the performer’s biological sex through the use of clothing, makeup, or other physical markers.” This bill was tabled on Feb. 13.
Close Thanks for signing up!
Watch for us in your inbox.
Subscribe Now KELOLAND Breaking News SIGN UP NOW 1116 also sought to ban drag, this time from any state owned facility, defining as ‘lewd or lascivious’ any “singing, speaking, dancing, acting, simulation, or pantomiming, where a performer exhibits a gender identity that is different from the performer’s biological sex through the use of clothing, makeup, or other physical markers, for the predominant purpose of appealing to a prurient interest.” An amended version of this bill when removed this section failed on March 2.
1080 is a bill which criminalizes the provision of certain kinds of gender-affirming care to transgender minors.
It was signed by Gov.
Kristi Noem on Feb. 13.
Bills of this sort are not unique to South Dakota.
Focusing on healthcare alone, there have been over 100 bills introduced in states nationwide this year which seek to limit care to the transgender community.
Arrest in Pierre after man barricades himself in home Libby Skarin, campaigns director for the ACLU of North Dakota, South Dakota and Wyoming spoke with KELOLAND News on the spread of anti-trans bills.
“Since 2015, South Dakota has really been what I would call an early adopter of filing legislation that harms transgender people generally, and transgender kids in particular,” said Skarin.
According to Skarin, South Dakota was the first state in the nation to actually pass a bill targeting transgender youth, a bill which would have banned trans kids from bathrooms or locker rooms which correspond to their gender identities.
This bill was vetoed by then-Governor Dennis Daugaard.
Since then, Skarin says bills attacking the transgender community have escalated rapidly.
“Around was a tipping point, and then we spent the next 50+ years seeing state legislatures and the federal government slowly role back those rights to the point where they no longer exist in half this country.” Skarin emphasized the importance of listening to the words of the people who push bills targeting the trans community.
“Three years ago, talking to people about Roe v. Wade being overturned, it was ‘oh you’re being a little hysterical — you’re worrying a little too much, that’s never going to happen,’ — and now it has happened.” This should not have come as a surprise, she said.
“It is vitally important for us to take the people that introduce these bills, and the organizations that push these bills — it is important for us to take them at their word,” said Skarin.
“They have been very clear — I’m sure you’ve seen the coverage lately about folks at big conferences talking about eradicating ‘transgenderism’.
When people say things like that, we have to take them seriously.” One major issue is a difference in ideas surrounding the actual existence of trans people.
For Skarin, the focus should be on preventing harm.
“We might disagree on this fundamental issue, but I think what we can and should agree on is to not do any harm — to me, that is the path forward.” .rich-text Copyright 2023 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
.article-footer Everything you need to host a St. Patrick’s Day party … Party Supplies / 23 hours ago If you’re hosting a St. Patrick’s Day party this year, you’ll need decorations, drinkware for beverages and more to get everyone in a festive mood.
19 convenient bibs for every baby Nursing & Feeding / 1 day ago Baby bibs come in various designs to handle all types of messes as your baby goes through the early stages of growth.
How to host your own paint-and-sip night Arts & Crafts / 1 day ago Paint-and-sip nights have exploded in popularity since 2007, when a New Orleans facility opened where people could sip their favorite drinks while painting.
View All BestReviews Top Stories: Media Grid 3 columns Top Stories Daylight saving time: Will we ‘lock the clocks’?
Windy Weather This Weekend; Milder Midweek Silicon Valley bank fails, assets seized Lawmaker arrested for obstructing snowplow Wadsworth, Koupal lead Hamlin, Wagner to state finals Top Stories More Stories: Headline List w/image: 2 columns More Stories Sanford-Fairview merger scrutinized by Minnesota … The Alliance prepares for inaugural VetAidSD Jackley applauds bills to improve election integrity Armed robber steals cash from Dareo’s Pizza Event looking at market outlook held Thursday in … New law to lure out-of-state professionals to SD Eye on KELOLAND: Sanford Pentagon turns 10 2 downtown SF restaurants closed for repairs More Stories Video Player w/Playlist KELOLAND.com Video KELOLAND On The Go 3/11/2023 8 hours ago Mayor’s youth council educates teens on government … 17 hours ago 3 years later COVID-19 is here to stay, doctors say 17 hours ago SD less satisfied with democracy, survey says 17 hours ago New conditions added to South Dakota’s medical cannabis … 17 hours ago Snow melt + ice melt = possible spring flooding 21 hours ago Catching up with longtime anchor Doug Lund 21 hours ago Chance encounter restores 70-year-old friendship … 21 hours ago Safety on snowmobiling trails a must in Black Hills 21 hours ago SDDOT contest winner meets Blizzard Buster 22 hours ago How daylight saving time affects kids 22 hours ago Crash near Hartford 23 hours ago More Videos More from Station: Headline List w/image: 2 columns (FB Only) More from KELOLAND.com Washington, Pierre win in class ‘AA’ semifinals Wall, Viborg-Hurley to play for class ‘B’ title Central Lyon defeats Western Christian, wins 2A title Augustana women fall in NCAA Tournament Mayor’s youth council educates teens on government … SD less satisfied with democracy, survey says New conditions added to medical cannabis program Snow melt + ice melt=possible spring flooding More from KELOLAND.com Ad Unit Square mr_combo1 END Ad Unit Square mr_combo1 no iframe support!
See Full Weather Forecast Trending Stories Catching up with longtime anchor Doug Lund Bud Grant, stoic coach of powerful Vikings teams, … Nebraska man with US Marshals warrant now in custody Chance encounter restores 70-year-old friendship 3 years later COVID-19 is here to stay, doctors say Don't Miss!
Play Our Basketball Challenge!
Contests / 1 week ago Win Tickets To See Kevin James!
Contests / 2 weeks ago Lake Superior Splendor Trip Don't Miss / 2 weeks ago Win a 70″ TV!
Contests / 4 weeks ago Your Guide To Coronavirus KELOLAND.com Original / 3 years ago KELOLAND Investigates Don't Miss / 1 year ago View All Don't Miss Nativo END Nativo Ad Unit Square mr1 END Ad Unit Square mr1 #secondary #content KELOLAND Local News and Weather Local News KELOLAND.com Original Weather Sports Investigates Capitol News Bureau Your Money Matters HealthBeat NewsNation Now KELOLAND Living Advertise With Us Advertising Terms and Conditions EEO Public File FCC Public File Information Get News App Get the iOS app Get the Android app from Google Play Get Weather App Get the iOS Weather app Get the Android Weather app from Google Play Stay Connected Privacy Policy Terms Of Use Covers FCC Applications Public File Assistance Contact The Hill NewsNation BestReviews Content Licensing Nexstar Digital Journalistic Integrity Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information © 1998 - 2023 Nexstar Media Inc. | All Rights Reserved.
#page Nielsen Optimera ✕ × Close Ad
