 End Google Site Verification Google Tag Manager (noscript) End Google Tag Manager (noscript) Temporary Styles to hide Countdown bar number - PC Skip to Content Cookies in use The Human Rights Campaign uses cookies to improve your site experience.
By using this site, you agree to our use of cookies.
To learn more, please read our Privacy Policy.
Accept More Information Human Rights Campaign Shop Donate Search Menu Human Rights Campaign Close Our Work Resources Get Involved About In Your Area News Search Manage Your Membership Equality Magazine Careers Press Contact Shop Donate Press Releases A Legislative Disgrace: Georgia Senate Advances Shameful Bill to Deny Gender-Affirming Care to Trans Youth A Legislative Disgrace: Georgia Senate Advances Shameful Bill to Deny Gender-Affirming Care to Trans Youth by Delphine Luneau • March 7, 2023 Share on Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Email Human Rights Campaign Denounces Senate Bill 140, Calls on Georgia House to Reject Hateful, Discriminatory Legislation ATLANTA — The Human Rights Campaign (HRC) — the nation’s largest lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) civil rights organization — today denounced the vote in the Georgia Senate to pass Senate Bill 140, legislation that will deny gender-affirming care to transgender youth in the state.
“There is no justification for the Georgia Senate to be advancing this bill – enacting this policy will only harm transgender youth, and would help nobody,” said Cathryn Oakley, Human Rights Campaign State Legislative Director and Senior Counsel.
“It is truly disappointing to see Georgia lawmakers picking up the self-serving, discriminatory policies being pushed across the country at the behest of extremist groups.
The truth is that best practice, age appropriate gender-affirming care is supported by every major medical organization, and decisions about what care is best for any person should be between them, their family and their care providers – and politicians need to butt out.
The Georgia House of Representatives must do the right thing here – refuse to even consider this astonishingly harmful and discriminatory legislation.” The Georgia Psychological Association recently came out in opposition to Senate Bill 140, saying “Legislative mandates that place restrictions on gender-affirming healthcare interfere with a child’s and their parents’/guardians’ autonomy in making healthcare decisions; interfere with a healthcare provider’s ability to use practice standards and relevant research to guide their work; and are at odds with the relevant research, standards of care, and clinical expertise.” So far in 2023, HRC is tracking 410 anti-LGBTQ+ bills that have been introduced in statehouses across the country.
175 of those would specifically restrict the rights of transgender people, the highest number of bills targeting transgender people in a single year to date.
This year, HRC is tracking: 100 bills that would prevent trans youth from being able to access age-appropriate, medically-necessary, best-practice health care; four have already become law, in Mississippi, South Dakota, Tennessee and Utah, More bathroom ban bills filed than in any previous year.
In a coordinated push led by national anti-LGBTQ+ groups, which deployed vintage discriminatory tropes, politicians in statehouses across the country introduced 315 discriminatory anti-LGBTQ+ bills in 2022 and 29 passed into law.
Despite this, fewer than 10% of these efforts succeeded.
The majority of the discriminatory bills – 149 bills – targeted the transgender and non-binary community, with the majority targeting children receiving the brunt of discriminatory legislation.
By the end of the 2022 legislative session, a record 17 bills attacking transgender and non-binary children passed into law.
Anti-LGBTQ+ legislation took several forms, including: 80 bills aimed to prevent transgender youth from playing school sports consistent with their gender identity.
19 states now exclude transgender athletes in school sports.
42 bills to prevent transgender and non-binary youth from receiving life-saving, medically-necessary gender-affirming healthcare.
5 states now restrict access to gender-affirming care.
70 curriculum censorship bills tried to turn back the clock and restrict teachers from discussing LGBTQ+ issues and other marginalized communities in their classrooms.
7 passed into law.
Get the facts about gender-affirming care: Every credible medical organization – representing over 1.3 million doctors in the United States – calls for age-appropriate gender-affirming care for transgender and non-binary people.
“Transition-related” or “gender-affirming” care looks different for every transgender and non-binary person.
Parents, their kids, and doctors make decisions together, and no medical interventions with permanent consequences happen until a transgender person is old enough to give truly informed consent.
Gender transition is a personal process that can include changing clothes, names, and hairstyles to fit a person’s gender identity.
Some people take medication, and some do not; some adults have surgeries, and others do not.
How someone transitions is their choice, to be made with their family and their doctor.
Therapists, parents and health care providers work together to determine which changes to make at a given time that are in the best interest of the child.
In most young children, this care can be entirely social.
This means: New name New hairstyle New clothing None of this care is irreversible.
Being transgender is not new.
Some say it can feel like being transgender is very new – but that’s because the media has been covering it more in recent months and years.
But transgender people have always existed and will continue to exist regardless of the bills we pass.
And very few transgender people change their mind.
ALL gender-affirming care is: Age-appropriate Medically necessary Supported by all major medical organizations Made in consultation with medical and mental health professionals AND parents And in many cases, this care is lifesaving!
A recent study from the Trevor Project provides data supporting this — transgender youth with access to gender-affirming hormone therapy have lower rates of depression and are at a lower risk for suicide.
T he Human Rights Campaign is America’s largest civil rights organization working to achieve equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer people.
HRC envisions a world where LGBTQ+ people are embraced as full members of society at home, at work and in every community .
Contact Us To make a general inquiry, please visit our contact page.
Members of the media can reach our press office at: (202) 572-8968 or email press@hrc.org.
Topics: Laws and Legislation Love conquers hate.
Donate Today Image: Wear your pride this year.
100% of every HRC merchandise purchase fuels the fight for equality.
Shop Now Join millions of supporters by signing up for the HRC newsletter.
Email * (Required) Zip code * (5 digits) (Required) Sign Me Up You'll receive email updates from HRC.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
twitter facebook instagram tiktok Manage Your Membership Adjust your membership details Equality Magazine The nation's largest-circulation LGBTQ+ magazine Careers Full-time positions, fellowships and internships Press Press releases, corporate assets Contact Department contacts, membership inquiries Privacy Policy Copyright Complaint Notice The Human Rights Campaign, All Rights Reserved Choose a Location Close Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Puerto Rico Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Leaving Site Close You are leaving HRC.org By clicking "GO" below, you will be directed to a website operated by the Human Rights Campaign Foundation, an independent 501(c)(3) entity.
Go Close
