Trans Legislation Tracker The Rise of Anti-trans Bills Further Reading Upcoming Events About Share Home The Rise of Anti-trans Bills Further Reading Upcoming Events About What about Texas?
2023 anti-trans bills tracker In 2023, anti-trans bills continue to be introduced across the country.
We track legislation that seeks to block trans people from receiving basic healthcare, education, legal recognition, and the right to publicly exist.
460 bills 43 states 10 passed 412 active 38 failed Click on a state to see bills National anti-trans legislation US HB1276 Introduced To protect children from medical malpractice in the form of gender transition procedures.
US HB216 Introduced My Child, My Choice Act of 2023 US HB429 Introduced No Tax Breaks for Radical Corporate Activism Act US HB734 Introduced Protection of Women and Girls in Sports Act of 2023 US HB736 Introduced To require elementary and middle schools that receive Federal funds to obtain parental consent before changing a minor child's gender markers, pronouns, or preferred name on any school form or allowing a child to change the child's sex-based accommodations, including locker rooms or bathrooms.
US HB985 Introduced Productivity Over Pronouns Act US HR115 Introduced Establishing a Women's Bill of Rights to reaffirm legal protections afforded to women under Federal law.
US SB187 Introduced No Tax Breaks for Radical Corporate Activism Act of 2023 US SB200 Introduced PROTECT Kids Act Parental Rights Over The Education and Care of Their Kids Act US SB435 Introduced Ensuring Military Readiness Act of 2023 US SB457 Introduced Protecting Our Kids from Child Abuse Act US SB635 Introduced A bill to protect children from medical malpractice in the form of gender transition procedures.
US SR53 Introduced A resolution establishing a Women's Bill of Rights to reaffirm legal protections afforded to women under Federal law.
Read the bills Explore a collection of anti-trans bills being considered across the U.S in 2023.
Wyoming SF0111 Child abuse charges for following the existing medical standards of (d) A person is guilty of child abuse, a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) years, if a person intentionally inflicts upon a child under the age of eighteen (18) years any procedure, drug, other agent or combination thereof that is administered to intentionally or knowingly change the sex of the child.
Consent of the child, the child's parents, guardian or any other person responsible for the child's welfare shall not be a defense to the crime defined by this subsection.
Read the bill Healthcare Child abuse Arizona SB1698 Hosting drag shows would redefine venues as "adult-oriented" businesses "Drag performance" means a performance: (A) In which one (1) or more performers: (i) Exhibits a gender identity that is different from the performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or other accessories that are traditionally worn by members of and are meant to exaggerate the gender identity of the performer's opposite sex; and (ii) Sings, lip-synchs, dances, or otherwise performs before an audience of at least two (2) persons for entertainment , whether performed for payment or not; and (B) That is intended to appeal to the prurient interest Read the bill Drag Public life OK SB129 Felony charges for providing gender-affirming care to people under 26 years 1.
A physician or other healthcare professional found to have knowingly referred for or provided gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six (26) years of age shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony.
B.
1.
Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six (26) years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall if doing so is contrary to the employee's or independent contractor's religious or moral convictions.
Read the bill Education Pronouns What anti-trans bills have passed in 2023?
We are tracking over two hundred bills in 2023, and a significant number of those will likely pass.
Last year, 26 bills of the 174 bills ultimately proposed (15%) passed.
Here are the bills that have passed so far in 2023.
AR SB199 Passed - pending Governor signature Concerning Medical Malpractice And Gender Transition In Minors; And To Create The Protecting Minors From Medical Malpractice Act Of 2023.
AR SB294 Passed - pending Governor signature To Create The Learns Act; To Amend Various Provisions Of The Arkansas Code As They Relate To Early Childhood Through Grade Twelve Education In The State Of Arkansas; And To Declare An Emergency.
AR SB43 Passed To Add Certain Restrictions To An Adult-oriented Performance; And To Define An Adult-oriented Performance.
MS HB1125 Passed Regulate Experimental Adolescent Procedures (REAP) Act; create to regulate transgender procedures and surgeries.
SD HB1080 Passed Prohibit certain medical and surgical interventions on minor patients.
TN SB0001 Passed AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 28; Title 29; Title 33; Title 34; Title 36; Title 37; Title 39; Title 40; Title 49; Title 56; Title 63; Title 68 and Title 71, relative to medical care of the young.
TN SB0003 Passed AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 7, Chapter 51, Part 14, relative to adult-oriented performances.
UT SB0016 Passed Transgender Medical Treatments and Procedures Amendments UT SB0100 Passed School Gender Identity Policies WY SF0133 Passed - pending Governor signature Student eligibility in interscholastic sports.
What bills are you tracking?
We strive to present the most comprehensive and up-to-date data record of anti-trans legislation in the United States.
Trans Legislation Tracker also maintains an expanding archive of historical data regarding U.S. anti-trans bills.
What is happening with anti-trans legislation in 2023?
2023 marks the fourth consecutive record-breaking year for anti-trans legislation in the U.S.
In just one month, the U.S. doubled the number of anti-trans bills being considered across the country from the previous year.
We've seen familiar themes: attacks on gender-affirming care, education, athletics, birth certificates, religious discrimination, and other categories documented in our 2022 anti-trans legislation overview .
However, in 2023 we've seen an escalation on healthcare, as states like Kansas, Oklahoma, and South Carolina introduce bans on gender-affirming care that extend into adulthood—up to 26 years old.
In educational settings, bills like AZ HB1700 encourage parents to report and ban books which "promote gender fluidity or gender pronouns."
Others like AZ SB1001 require that both a guardian and teacher approve of a student's pronouns.
We've also seen the rise of "drag bans" targeting gender non-conforming performance.
Bills like AZ SB1026 use broad definitions like dressing "in clothing and makeup opposite of the performer's gender at birth" and using language like "drag show targeting minors" to insinuate harmful intent.
And the definitions are often broad enough to include libraries hosting story hours, musicals, or even an acting troupe performing Shakespeare .
National anti-trans legislation also surfaced in 2023.
The "Women's Bill of Rights" would erase trans recognition by the federal government, defining sex assigned at birth as an "immutable" definition of man or woman, boy or girl.
The "My Child, My Choice Act" would impose educational restrictions nationally that are similar to those we're tracking in states across the country.
Learn about anti-trans legislation Do you want to learn about the recent history of anti-trans legislation in the United States?
We maintain an overview of anti-trans data that documents the steep rise in U.S. bills targeting trans kids and adults.
You can also explore our complete record of 2022 anti-trans legislation .
Our further reading recommendations curate articles exploring the language and arguments employed in these transphobic bills, as well as the organizations promoting anti-trans legislation.
We produce our own features including "What about Texas?"
, which describes state-level efforts that go beyond the footprint of legislation, like Texas Governor Gregg Abbott's recent attack on widely accepted gender-affirming care.
Our data Our independent research is supported through consultation with lists maintained by the ACLU , Human Rights Campaign , Freedom for all Americans , GLAAD , and other organizations.
Our pages are updated using the Legiscan API .
Trans Legislation Tracker data has helped news organizations, researchers, and U.S. government officials bring awareness to this historic rise in anti-trans legislation.
