 End Google Site Verification Google Tag Manager (noscript) End Google Tag Manager (noscript) Temporary Styles to hide Countdown bar number - PC Skip to Content Cookies in use The Human Rights Campaign uses cookies to improve your site experience.
By using this site, you agree to our use of cookies.
To learn more, please read our Privacy Policy.
Accept More Information Human Rights Campaign Shop Donate Search Menu Human Rights Campaign Close Our Work Resources Get Involved About In Your Area News Search Manage Your Membership Equality Magazine Careers Press Contact Shop Donate Resources Unprecedented Onslaught of State Legislation Targeting Transgender Americans Unprecedented Onslaught of State Legislation Targeting Transgender Americans Share on Twitter LinkedIn Facebook Email The disturbing proliferation of anti-trans bills, including 23 that target children in schools and school sports, is part of a stunning surge of more than 175 anti-LGBTQ bills in 32 states this year.
Winning over hearts and minds has always been crucial in winning the fight for equality for LGBTQ Americans, and the anti-transgender fear-mongering manifested by this wave of anti-transgender legislation is a stark reminder of how much work remains to be done in educating Americans about who transgender people are.
The Human Rights Campaign will continue to work with our state and national partners to vigorously oppose and defeat anti-equality legislation and to advance critically needed protections at the state and federal level for all LGBTQ people.
Download Anti-Transgender Legislation Spreads Nationwide, Bills Targeting Transgender Children Surge Download PDF The Human Rights Campaign reports on news, events and resources of the Human Rights Campaign Foundation that are of interest to the general public and further our common mission to support the LGBTQ community.
Topics: Transgender State & Local Policy Laws & Legislation Related Resources View All Related Resources Bisexual, Coming Out, LGBTQ+ Youth, Transgender, Parenting Celebrate National Coming Out Day with HRC!
Federal Policy, Laws & Legislation Congressional Scorecard Transgender HRC’s Brief Guide to Getting Transgender Coverage Right Love conquers hate.
Donate Today Image: Wear your pride this year.
100% of every HRC merchandise purchase fuels the fight for equality.
Shop Now Join millions of supporters by signing up for the HRC newsletter.
Email * (Required) Zip code * (5 digits) (Required) Sign Me Up You'll receive email updates from HRC.
You can unsubscribe at any time.
twitter facebook instagram tiktok Manage Your Membership Adjust your membership details Equality Magazine The nation's largest-circulation LGBTQ+ magazine Careers Full-time positions, fellowships and internships Press Press releases, corporate assets Contact Department contacts, membership inquiries Privacy Policy Copyright Complaint Notice The Human Rights Campaign, All Rights Reserved Choose a Location Close Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Puerto Rico Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Leaving Site Close You are leaving HRC.org By clicking "GO" below, you will be directed to a website operated by the Human Rights Campaign Foundation, an independent 501(c)(3) entity.
Go Close
