Skip to main content Exclusive news, data and analytics for financial market professionals Reuters home World Business Legal Markets Breakingviews Technology Investigations More My View Register United States 2 minute read March 10, 2023 3:12 AM UTC Last Updated ago Kansas legislature passes bill to ban transgender athletes from girls' sports Reuters Transgender rights activist waves a transgender flag at a rally in Washington Square Park in New York, U.S., May 24, 2019.
REUTERS/Demetrius Freeman 1 2 March 9 (Reuters) - Kansas' Republican-led legislature on Thursday passed a bill that would ban transgender athletes from playing girls or women's school sports if they were born male.
Kansas Governor Laura Kelly, a Democrat, is expected to veto the bill, as she vetoed two similar measures in the previous two years.
But this year the bill appears to have enough support to override any veto.
The governor's office did not immediately reply to a request for comment.
Supporters of the bill and those like it say it is necessary to ensure a level playing field in women's sports.
Opponents and LGBTQ advocates say the laws are unnecessary, given the small number of transgender athletes in school sports.
Transgender rights have been pushed to the forefront of the U.S. culture wars and political standoffs between Republicans and Democrats.
At least 18 states have passed or enacted legislation preventing transgender students from playing on school sports teams matching their gender identity.
Latest Updates United States category DeSantis makes Iowa debut as Trump waits in wings , article with video United States category U.S. House Republican hardliners unveil spending demands for raising debt ceiling , article with image View 2 more stories The Kansas Senate on Thursday voted 28-11 to pass the bill.
The House voted 82-40 to pass the measure on Feb. 23.
To override a veto, two-thirds of each chamber would have vote against the governor's action.
The latest version of the bill bars transgender girls and women from female sports teams in public elementary schools, middle schools, high schools and colleges, as well as from private school teams that compete against public schools.
Several Republican-led states have also passed laws that ban gender-affirming healthcare for transgender youth.
In some cases, parents and doctors can be charged with crimes if that treatment is provided.
Other bills before state legislatures include bans on teachers from using pronouns that match a student's gender identity, and requirements that transgender people use bathrooms corresponding with their gender at birth.
Reporting by Brad Brooks in Lubbock, Texas; Editing by Edwina Gibbs Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Read Next United States category Economists warn of costs if Medicare covers new obesity drugs , article with image 12:46 PM UTC United States category Biden faithful to Air Force One paint job, Air Force says , article with image 4:15 AM UTC United States category Michigan man arrested after alleged threats against governor, Biden , article with image 12:49 AM UTC Legal category California man gets 25 years to life for 1996 murder of student Kristin Smart , article with image 1:49 AM UTC World India, Australia aim to boost critical mineral trade in broader deal , article with image Asia Pacific category · March 11, 2023 · 9:41 AM UTC India and Australia aim to expand trade in critical mineral to help them achieve their goals on reducing carbon emissions, as they seek a broad trade pact, Indian Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal said Saturday.
United Kingdom category Aldi to lift fresh produce purchase limits in Britain as shortages ease , article with image 6:21 PM UTC United Kingdom category British PM Sunak says row over presenter Lineker is matter for the BBC , article with image 6:12 PM UTC Africa category Libyan elections are possible this year, U.N. envoy says , article with image 2:52 PM UTC United Kingdom category UK finance minister Hunt says he can't rush into tax cuts , article with gallery 11:28 AM UTC Site Index Browse World Business Legal Markets Breakingviews Technology Investigations , opens new tab Lifestyle About Reuters About Reuters , opens new tab Careers , opens new tab Reuters News Agency , opens new tab Brand Attribution Guidelines , opens new tab Reuters Leadership , opens new tab Reuters Fact Check , opens new tab Reuters Diversity Report , opens new tab Stay Informed Download the App , opens new tab Newsletters , opens new tab Information you can trust Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day.
Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Follow Us Thomson Reuters Products Westlaw , opens new tab Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.
Onesource , opens new tab The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.
Checkpoint , opens new tab The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals.
Refinitiv Products Refinitiv Workspace , opens new tab Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.
Refinitiv Data Catalogue , opens new tab Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
Refinitiv World-Check , opens new tab Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.
Advertise With Us , opens new tab Advertising Guidelines , opens new tab Cookies , opens new tab Terms of Use , opens new tab Privacy , opens new tab Digital Accessibility , opens new tab Corrections , opens new tab Site Feedback , opens new tab All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes.
See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.
© 2023 Reuters.
All rights reserved
